{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf540
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue204;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11400\viewh11920\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Known issues in Bol Processor\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 Version 2.9.7 beta
\fs28 \

\b0\fs24 \
Below is a list of significant bugs, issues, and missing features that we expect you will encounter while using the current version of Bol Processor.  There are many other minor issues of which we are aware and that are not listed here, but if you notice anything else that does not seem right, please let us know!  In general, your comments and questions are greatly appreciated.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\li360\ql\qnatural

\fs22 \cf0 The Graphics window and the picture portion of the Sound-objects prototypes window do not display anything when BP is run as a native application on Macs with Intel processors (which is most Macs made since 2007).  We need to overhaul BP's drawing routines to fix this.  In the meantime, if you need graphics on an Intel Mac, you can get them to work by running Bol Processor in Rosetta.  Please see this support article from Apple for instructions:  {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1730"}}{\fldrslt "
\b Forcing a Universal application to run with Rosetta"
\f1  
\f0\b0 <\cf2 http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1730\cf0 >}}\
\
Printing has not been implemented yet on Mac OS X.  You can instead open any BP2 file in a text editor such as BBEdit or Text Wrangler to print.\
\
Bol Processor is unaware of the Dock on OS X.  You may find that hiding the Dock makes BP2 more usable for now.\
\
The Undo function can only undo a single action.  Beware that it does not always do what you would expect.  For example, selecting some text and then typing to replace it is currently counted by BP as two actions, so Undo will only erase the newly typed characters.\
\
Some of the interface elements have their text cropped or their borders overlap causing inconsistent appearance.  We will get to this eventually, but if anyone wants to help, please send us an email.  (The work does not involve any programming -- it is just time consuming).\
\
I have noticed that BP2 can crash when using or closing the Sound-object prototypes window.  I have not traced this bug yet.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li360\ql\qnatural
\cf0 The HTML documentation is a little out-of-date since it has not changed since BP 2.9.3.  In particular, the changes for OS X and features added in 2.9.4 and 2.9.6 are not covered and web links beginning with <http://perso.wanadoo.fr/bel/music/> are no longer correct.  Most functional changes since BP 2.9.3 are described in the online help though and the materials from the broken links are available on the BP Sourceforge site.\
\
}