{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset77 LucidaGrande-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset77 Geneva;\f2\fmodern\fcharset77 Courier-Oblique;
\f3\fmodern\fcharset77 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11200\viewh12560\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Bol Processor 2.9.6 Read Me\

\fs24 June 26, 2007\

\f1\b0 \
Bol Processor is a program for music composition and improvisation with real-time MIDI, MIDI file, and Csound output.  It produces music from a set of rules (a compositional grammar) or from text scores typed or captured from a MIDI instrument.  Bol Processor 2 began as a shareware application for Macintosh computers developed by Bernard Bel and Srikumar Karaikudi Subramanian.  The original Bol Processor program was developed by Bernard Bel and Jim Kippen on an Apple IIc.\
\
Bol Processor 2 is now distributed as free software (open source) under a BSD-style license (please see the License.txt file for complete terms).  BP development is hosted by Sourceforge at <\cf2 http://bolprocessor.sourceforge.net/\cf0 >.  Developers interested in joining the project are most welcome to do so.  Please email us for more information.\
\
This package contains the final release of Bol Processor 2.9.6 for MacOS X.  A package for MacOS 7, 8, and 9 is also available from the Sourceforge project site.   Full documentation and a set of examples is included with this package \cf3 (1)\cf0 .\
\
The most significant change in BP 2.9.6 is that it now runs as a native application on MacOS X.  We have managed to maintain compatibility with the "Classic" MacOS as well (although a Macintosh computer with a PowerPC processor is now required).\
\
Some minor cosmetic issues still remain on MacOS X, but the program should be pretty stable now.   All of the major issues with the 2.9.6 beta have been resolved except that printing on OS X remains unimplemented.  You can instead open any BP2 file in a text editor such as BBEdit or Text Wrangler to print it.  A comprehensive list of user-visible changes is given below.\
\

\f0\b Installing Bol Processor on OS X\

\f1\b0 \
There are no special installation requirements other than a minimum system version of OS X 10.2.  You can just drag the Bol Processor application wherever you like onto your hard drive.  You can also copy the documentation and example files wherever you would like.\
\
QuickTime MIDI instruments are not available via CoreMIDI.  To use your Mac's internal speaker for playback, you will need to install and run a software synthesizer.  A good free one is SimpleSynth by Pete Yandell.  You can download SimpleSynth from <http://pete.yandell.com/software/>.  For Midi input without an external keyboard, we recommend MidiKeys by Chris Reed.  You can download MidiKeys from <http://www.manyetas.com/creed/midikeys.html>.\
\

\f0\b Obtaining Help Using Bol Processor\

\f1\b0 \
Bol Processor comes with a comprehensive Quickstart Guide and Reference Manual in HTML format that you can read with any web browser \cf3 (1)\cf0 .  In addition, BP2 documents most items with a built-in help system: just press the Help key or Command-? and the mouse cursor will change to a question mark.  Then click on any button or label, choose any menu item, or select words in any text window and BP2 will display help on that item.  Browsing through the many included example files can also be a good way to learn about new concepts.\
\
For additional assistance and information, there is a forum for general discussion of Bol Processor at <\cf2 http://sourceforge.net/forum/forum.php?forum_id=555616\cf0 > and a developer mailing list at <\cf2 http://lists.sourceforge.net/mailman/listinfo/bolprocessor-devel\cf0 > \'d1 both hosted by the Sourceforge project.  Regular announcements are posted on a special "read-only" announcement list: <\cf2 http://lists.sourceforge.net/mailman/listinfo/bolprocessor-announce\cf0 >.\
\
A shared space for documentation and users' feedback is available on the website <\cf2 http://crdo.fr/phpwiki/index.php?pagename=BolProcessor>.  \cf0 Anyone can create a user login and contribute.\
\
Finally, you can contact the developers of Bol Processor at the email addresses given near the end of this file.\
\

\f0\b What's New Since Version 2.9.5\

\f1\b0 \
Bol Processor uses CoreMIDI for MIDI input and output on OS X.  You can choose input sources and output destinations by going to the "Devices" menu and choosing "CoreMIDI settings".  If you are using external MIDI devices, you may need to configure your studio first by opening the Audio Midi Setup program that comes with OS X.  When you launch BP 2.9.6, it will automatically connect to the first MIDI source and destination that it finds unless you save a startup MIDI settings file.  For a more extensive description of the MIDI implementation on OS X, see the "CoreMIDI settings" entry in BP2's online help.\
\
MIDI settings on MacOS X can be saved to a new file type: BP2 MIDI driver settings.  The suggested filename prefix and extension for these files are "-md." and ".bpmd".  You can save and load MIDI driver settings using the buttons in the CoreMIDI settings window.  In the future, this file type will be able to store the settings for any available MIDI driver (CoreMIDI, OMS, or any that are added in the future).\
\
On OS 9 and earlier, BP2 continues to use Opcode's OMS for MIDI input and output and you can select QuickTime as the output destination.  The selected OMS input and output devices are still stored in the general settings file for now.\
\
MIDI thru (i.e. the relaying of messages received from the MIDI input to the output) is now OFF by default.  This prevents some unpleasant problems when the same program or device is automatically connected to both the input and output.  You can turn MIDI thru back on in the "MIDI filter" window by checking all of the "transmit" boxes.  The MIDI filter settings are saved when you save a (general) settings file.\
\
Bol Processor no longer requires filenames to have prefixes (-gr, -ho, etc.).  You can still use the prefixes if you like, but for cross-platform compatibility we are encouraging the use of new filename extensions (.bpgr, .bpho, etc.).  Extensions are optional as well.  For a list of extensions that BP 2.9.6 uses, see the "Types-creators" entry in the online help.  Note that when using a file without a prefix, and BP2 adds its name to the top of other windows for opening again later, that the prefix and a colon (":") will be added before the file's actual name.  For example, if you save an alphabet file with the name "myalphabet.bpho", then BP2 will add the line "-ho.:myalphabet.bpho" to the top of the grammar window.  This convention is required for BP 2.9.6 to recognize that it should load the alphabet file, and the correct filename will be automatically determined.\
\
BP2's menu commands have been rearranged and icons have been added to the Windows menu in the hope of making them a little easier to use.  A new command for saving the current settings file has been added to the File menu and its name will change to reflect the name of the current file.  Use "Save settings as..." to save to a different file.  A few keyboard shortcuts have been changed because of conflicts with MacOS X (see below) and BP2 now correctly recognizes shortcuts using the Option key on all international keyboard layouts that use the Roman script system (except on System 7).   \
\
On MacOS 8, 9, and X, you can now choose from among BP2's several formats for saving files directly in the Save dialog instead of having to respond to a separate dialog afterwards.  Just select the format you want in the pop-up menu labeled "Format".  And when opening files, there are sometimes several choices in the "Show" pop-up menu allowing you to filter the files that are shown.  Choosing "All Readable Documents" will allow you to open any appropriate BP2 file or any text file for BP2's text-based document types (grammar, alphabet, etc.).\
\
On MacOS X, BP2 will now look for the -se.startup, +sc.startup, and +sc.shutdown files in your user preferences folder instead of the BP2 application folder.  The exact location of these files should be (your home folder) -> Library -> Preferences -> Bol Processor.  BP2 will also look for a new file named -md.startup when launched in the same location as the other startup files.  This file stores your default Midi driver settings.  (Currently, you can only create this file when using CoreMIDI on OS X).\
\
In addition, there have been many changes to make BP2's interface more consistent in appearance and behavior with itself and with the system.  The online help has been updated for most of the new and changed features.  And numerous other bug fixes and improvements have been made.\
\
List of changed keyboard shortcuts (old shortcuts still work on OS 9):\
\

\f2\i Show all settings windows:
\f3\i0                         Command-;\
                                                  [was Command-Option-space]\

\f2\i Show just Computation and Input-output settings:
\f3\i0   Command-Option-;\

\f2\i Play the current sound-object prototype: 
\f3\i0          Command-P\
 (only when prototypes window is active)          [was Command-space]\
\

\f1 \

\f0\b Future Directions\

\f1\b0 \
Now that we have a working MacOS X version of BP2, there are several options for further development of Bol Processor.  We plan to continue developing and improving the OS X user experience by taking advantage of newer operating system features.  We also expect to add new options for output such as performing musical items with Supercollider or linking BP2 to a speech synthesizer.  These features will likely be a part of "Bol Processor 3".\
\
We expect that a completed version of Bol Processor 3 will continue to run on MacOS X but probably not MacOS 9 and earlier.  Porting some or all of BP3 to Linux and Windows would be wonderful too.  But to make all of this happen, we need help from other programmers as well as feedback and suggestions from our users.\
\
Please join and help us determine the future of Bol Processor !!\
\

\f3 Anthony Kozar                      Bernard Bel\
akozar@users.sourceforge.net       belbernard@users.sourceforge.net\
\

\f1 \
\cf3 (1)\cf0  The HTML documentation is a little out-of-date since it has not changed since BP 2.9.3.  In particular, the changes for OS X and features added in 2.9.4 and 2.9.6 are not covered and web links beginning with <http://perso.wanadoo.fr/bel/music/> are no longer correct.  Most functional changes since BP 2.9.3 are described in the online help though and the materials from the broken links are available on the BP Sourceforge site.\
}